# Big Five NEO-PI-R Introduction

The **NEO-PI-R**, or *Neuroticism, Extraversion, Openness Personality Inventory-Revised*, can be seen as an expansion of the Big Five personality typing system. While the Big Five traits—Openness, Conscientiousness, Extraversion, Agreeableness, and Neuroticism (OCEAN for short)—are widely understood, NEO-PI-R broke each trait down into subcategories of traits to add more nuance to understanding people. Rather than having five traits, this now allows for 35 traits, that can help narrow down the portrait of an individual, seeing the nuances that makes up how a person interacts within the world.  

I want you to try something for me. Go into ChatGPT and give it a prompt, any prompt will do. Then I want you to just watch what actually happens. It might seem like a weird request, you've seen it a thousand times. Now unfortunately, all you can see is the system taking a moment and then ouputting. What we don't see is what is happening on the other side. ChatGPT must analyze your prompt, do any research it needs to do, consider how it will answer your prompt, and then start generating the output word-for-word. Here's the kicker, no matter what you prompt, it has to run through that series of steps in relatively short order, consistently. It has to give you the information you need in a fast way. Ultimately, what this means is that there is only so much it can give you at any one time.

Arcanas, when used with AI systems like ChatGPT, provides a robust roadmap of a Personas' *personality matrix* (review the Prompt Persona tutorial for more information). This differs from a Prompt Persona, where you prompt the system *"I want you to pretend to be xyz*, providing the **Role**, **Expertise**, and **Communication**. While Arcanas and Prompt Personas each have their strengths and weaknesses, both give important information to the AI that when it is processing your prompt, it gives key insight into how to output. 

Now, as the other tutorial state, the AI needs Role, Expertise, and Communication to define the personality to emulate, and it also states that if the AI doesn't get this information, it will autogenerate based on what you do give it and the context of the prompt. With the Big Five NEO-PI-R, it allows the AI to autogenerate **Role**, **Expertise**, and **Communication**. Now this is important for a key reason, though it may seem counter-intuitive (when it comes to using personas with the AI, it is quite counter-intuitive): the more information the system has for a personality matrix, the better able it is to adapt to the shifting of contexts. One of the major flaws of a Prompt Persona versus a Persona Profile, is that it can have difficulty when the user rapidly changes the context. The 35 traits of Arcanas versus the 3 key identifiers of Prompt Personas gives the AI more capability to think and behave as the personality you upload into it.

**tl;dr**: Big Five NEO-PI-R essentially gives an AI persona profile an emotional and socialization brain.

The rest of this tutorial will break down the 35 traits based on their initial Big Five categories, so you can gain an understanding of their scores. Now, if you want, you can add **Role**, **Expertise**, and **Communication** into an Arcanas profile, if you want. Arcanas is a introduction to Persona Profiles, but more advanced and complex Persona Profiles do make use of both.
